---
title: Essay
layout: about
permalink: /essay.html
---

{% include feature/nav-menu.html sections="Introduction;Brief Contextualization of U.S.-Indian Relations From 1847 to 1863 in the Pacific Northwest;The Treaty Era Between 1855-1863;Overall Consequences and Effects of the Treaty Era on Indigenous Culture;Conclusion;Notes" %}

# America's Political Response to U.S.-Indian Relations in the Pacific Northwest

### Introduction

During the nineteenth century, the United States viewed indigenous nations as both a threat and hindrance to westward expansion.  President Andrew Jackson and others asserted that a policy of Indian removal opened up land for American expansion and provided indigenous nations with an opportunity to create a better life for themselves.  However, others, such as Nez Perce Chief Lawyer and General Benjamin Alvord, argued that the United States should fulfill its treaty obligations and not treat the Indians as “hostiles.”  These tensions exacerbated conflicts between indigenous tribes and American settlers.  During 1855 to 1871, the United States created treaties with Indian tribes that promoted subjugation and land dispossession in the Pacific Northwest, which exemplified a cultural clash between indigenous and American values. 

### Brief Contextualization of U.S.-Indian Relations From 1847 to 1863 in the Pacific Northwest 

The United States preserved their fragile relations with the Nez Perce when they sought out the Cayuse Tribe who instigated the Whitman Massacre of 1847, which divided the Nez Perce and the Americans.  Beginning in 1848, Americans requested that the Nez Perce help them apprehend the Cayuse tribal members who murdered Dr. Whitman and his family.  This request spurred the creation of a coalition of several peace-loving Nez Perce chiefs, such as Lawyer, who supported the Americans because they argued that it was the “only way to protect their own people and lands.”  This belief framed this response as a conflict between those who promoted the use of peaceful methods to deal with the Cayuse and those who resorted to violence.  Because of these divisions, some tribal members, such as Looking Glass, supported the Americans when they agreed to join Colonel James Water’s search mission while others rejected a sudden American “search [of] the Nez Perce village for the Cayuses.”  However, in 1863, Chief Lawyer reiterated the Nez Perce’s friendly intentions when he contended that “[the Cayuse] were taken and delivered up.”  He suggested that even though they disagreed on how to apprehend the Cayuse, the Nez Perce recognized that they should support the United States if they wanted to maintain their self-determination. 

During the late 1850s, the United States cemented their relationship with the Cayuse, Umatilla, Walla Walla, Nez Perce, Flathead, Kootenai and Upper Pend d’Oreilles tribes when they held treaty councils that promoted America’s economic interests, which caused a clash between the indigenous people and Americans.  In 1853, the United States appointed Isaac T. Stevens as the new governor of the Washington Territory and commissioned him to discover “the most feasible route for a railroad to the Pacific.”  Stevens concluded that the Washington Territory provided new local and global economic opportunities for the United States.  These opportunities fostered fear among the Indians because they recognized that Stevens sought to purchase their land and “open [it up] to white settlers.”  This fear implied that the “Walla Walla Treaty Council” and the “Hellgate Treaty Council” represented a clash between American economic values and indigenous self-determination.  Because of this cultural clash, Stevens and others advocated for policies, such as allotments and reservations, that implanted American ideals onto these tribes.   Big Canoe, a member of the Upper Pend d’Oreilles tribe, reinforced these tensions when he claimed that “I am not going to let [my land] go.”  Canoe implied that these treaties invaded his tribe’s sovereignty and their personal connections with the land.  Steven’s treaties set the United States on a collision course toward disunification and further cultural clashes with indigenous tribes. 

The United States violated the terms of the Nez Perce Treaty of 1855 and other 1855 treaties when they allowed settlers onto Indian land, which deteriorated U.S.-tribal relations and divided the tribes during the 1860s.  Beginning in 1855, Americans discovered gold in Colville Valley in the Washington Territory, which caused an influx of settlers onto indigenous land.  This discovery instigated fear and hostility among the Indians, who argued that “they should not have signed the treaties” if the United States ignored its terms.  These conflicts framed the delayed ratification of the 1855 treaties as a clash between friendly relations with the Americans and resistance.  Because of this clash, some members of the Nez Perce Tribe, such as Chief Lawyer, supported the Americans even when they opposed decreasing the size of their reservation at the 1863 Treaty Council.  Others, such as Looking Glass, decried white settlement as a violation of the Nez Perce Treaty of 1855, which caused the Nez Perce to separate into the treaty and anti-treaty groups.  Chief Joseph’s speech “An Indian’s View of Indian Affairs” reinforced these divisions when he claimed that “the white man had no right to come here and take our country.”  Joseph’s speech demonstrated the growing animosity between the Americans, treaty and anti-treaty bands of the Nez Perce, over the issue of land sovereignty. 

### The Treaty Era Between 1855-1863 

The United States created treaties in 1855 and 1863 that promoted American ownership ideals, which stifled indigenous land and property beliefs.  The Nez Perce Treaty of 1863 promised “each male [tribal member] the privilege of locating upon one lot as a permanent home for such person” while reserving some land “for the sole use and benefit of the Indians.”  This belief framed landownership as a conflict between private property and communal ownership.  Because of this expectation, Governor Stevens and others promoted treaty policies, such as conditional allotment and reservations, that required indigenous people to practice individual ownership and exploit their land for economic gain.  However, Ute-si-mil-a-kin, a Nez Perce tribal member at the 1863 treaty council, opposed the idea of private property when he claimed that his tribe “understood that the whole of the reservation was for [them], to cultivate and to occupy as [they] pleased.”  Ute-si-mil-a-kin’s belief illustrated the Nez Perce’s cultural support for collective dominion over their land, which clashed with America’s individualistic values.  By not respecting the Nez Perce’s idea of collective ownership, the United States promoted a policy of early indigenous assimilation into American society. 

America espoused their support for indigenous sovereignty within the reservations but demanded that the tribes depend upon the United States Government, which promoted subjugation.  The Hellgate Treaty of 1859 required the Flathead, Kootenai and Upper Pend d’Oreilles tribes to “acknowledge their dependence upon the Government of the United States and promise to be friendly with all citizens thereof.”  This requirement framed indigenous government as a clash between self-determination and paternalism.  Because of this contentious arrangement, Americans advocated for a government system that placed the tribes under the control of an Indian commissioner.  In his 1858 letter to Charles E., Governor Stevens promoted this government structure when he asserted that he needed “an agent [who had] the authority to speak officially of the views of the Government” at the Blackfeet Treaty Council.  He smothered indigenous sovereignty when he suggested that the United States should adopt a paternalistic attitude toward the Indians.  Stevens’ paternalistic attitude stoked the flames for growing anti-American sentiment among the tribes and set the United States on a collision course toward war with the Indians. 

### Overall Consequences and Effects of the Treaty Era on Indigenous Culture

After the United States implemented the 1855 and 1863 treaties, they continued to break their promises with the indigenous nations, which severed relations between Americans and the tribes.  The 1855 Treaty with the Walla Walla, Cayuse, and Umatilla and the Nez Perce Treaty of 1863 guaranteed that these tribes and others would have “exclusive use” of their reservations without encroachment from American settlers.  However, prior to the ratification of the 1863 treaty, Americans settled on indigenous reservations in violation of the treaty terms, which fueled animosity between the Indians and the United States.  This animosity suggested that Americans valued their own economic expansion and gain above indigenous rights and treaty agreements.  Because of this cultural clash, Chief Lawyer advocated for policies, such as the building of schools promised in the treaties and the elimination of Americans settlers on the reservations, that honored treaty agreements and protect Indian sovereignty.  Governor Lyon responded to Lawyer’s requests when he reiterated that “the strong arm of the Government shall protect you, and carry out the stipulations of the Stevens treaty.”  By reinforcing America’s adherence to the treaties, Lyon reaffirmed the United States’ commitment to maintaining friendly relations with the indigenous tribes even as America pursued a policy of acculturation and assimilation. 

### Conclusion

From 1847 to 1871, the United States created treaties that forced American values onto indigenous people with little recourse, which created a culture clash.  Governor Stevens and others promoted treaty policies that reflected inherent American values, such as allotment and private property.  However, others, such as Chief Joseph, argued that the United States violated their treaty obligations and deprived indigenous nations of their self-determination.  These tensions between the Americans and the Indians exacerbated conflicts, that culminated in the end of the Treaty Era in 1871 and the beginning of the Nez Perce Wars of 1877.  Two questions remain: how treaties fostered later policies of allotment and assimilation and how they continue to impact modern relations between the United States and indigenous nations? 

## Notes
